# Chapter 1 - Boolean Logic

Every digital device is based on a set of chips designed to process and store info.

## Boolean Algebra

- Boolean values are binary: true/false, 1/0, on/off, etc.
- Boolean functions operate on binary inputs and return binary outputs
- A **truth table** represents all variations of a boolean function's input variables, and its output for each set of inputs.

- **And**: x And y = 1 when x and y are 1 (represented as xy or x*y)
- **Or**: x Or y = 1 when either x, y or both are 1 (represented as x + y)
- **Not**: Not x is 1 when x is 0 (represented as x̄)

- The **canonical representation** of a boolean function is the or-sum of all the variants where the function returns 1.

e.g. f = (x+y) * z̅

The following will make the function return 1:

x=0, y=1, z=0 = x̄yz̅
x=1, y=0, z=0 = xy̅z̅
x=1, y=1, z=0 = xyz̅

So this function's canonical representation is f(x,y,z) = x̄yz̅ + xy̅z̅ + xyz̅

(Note the pluses here mean Or, because any of the three combinations would make the function return 0)

## Two-Input Boolean Functions

- For n binary variables, there are 2^(2^n) boolean functions
- That makes 16 functions for two binary variables.
- **Nand** is very important: Not(xy)
    - You can construct And, Or and Not from Nand
    - Therefore, you can create every boolean function from just Nands!

## Gate Logic

- **Gate**: A physical device that implements a boolean function. If *f* operates on *n* variables and returns *m* binary results, the gate implementing *f* will have *n* input pins and *m* output pins
- Most gates today are transistors etched in silicon, packaged as chips
- Gates are often composed of simpler gates under the hood. e.g. a three-way And gate is really just And(And(xy), z)
- Like code, gates have interfaces and implementations. There's only one interface for a given function, but there are often multiple implementations. The most efficient implementation uses the fewest gates.

## Building Chips

- Physically soddering chips together and testing outputs is slow and expensive. You don't want to do it until you know you've got it right.
- Hardware Description Language (HDL) is a modeling tool that lets one virtually build, test and optimize chips before actually producing any physical hardware.


## Truth Tables and Implementations

### Nand

| a  | b  |  Nand(a,b)  |
| ---| -- | :----------:|
| 0  | 0  |  1          |
| 0  | 1  |  1          |
| 1  | 0  |  1          |
| 1  | 1  |  0          |

### Not

| a | Not(a) |
|---|:------:|
| 0 | 1      | 
| 1 | 0      |

`Not(a) = Nand(1, a)`

### And

| a  | b  |  And(a,b)  |
| ---| -- | :----------:|
| 0  | 0  |  0          |
| 0  | 1  |  0          |
| 1  | 0  |  0          |
| 1  | 1  |  1          |

`And(a,b) = Not(Nand(a,b))`

### Or

| a  | b  |  Or(a,b)  |
| ---| -- | :----------:|
| 0  | 0  |  0          |
| 0  | 1  |  1          |
| 1  | 0  |  1          |
| 1  | 1  |  1          |

`Or(a,b) = Nand(Not(a), Not(b))`

### Xor

| a  | b  |  Xor(a,b)  |
| ---| -- | :----------:|
| 0  | 0  |  0          |
| 0  | 1  |  1          |
| 1  | 0  |  1          |
| 1  | 1  |  0          |

`Xor(a,b) = And(Or(a,b), Nand(a,b))`

### Multiplexor

| a | b | sel | Mux(a,b,sel) |
|---|---|-----|:------------:|
| 0 | 0 | 0   | 0            |
| 0 | 1 | 0   | 0            |
| 1 | 0 | 0   | 1            |
| 1 | 1 | 0   | 1            |
| 0 | 0 | 1   | 0            |
| 0 | 1 | 1   | 1            |
| 1 | 0 | 1   | 0            |
| 1 | 1 | 1   | 1            |

`Mux(a,b,sel) = Or(And(Not(sel), a), And(sel, b))`

### Demultiplexor

| sel  | a  |  b  |
| ---| :--: | :--:|
| 0  | in   |  0  |
| 1  | 0    |  in | 

`DMux(in, sel) = {a: Mux(in, 0, sel), b:{Mux(0, in, sel)}}`